1. 

For this last part of our presentation, we will talk about the connections between nonnegative matrix factorisation and other mathematical problems.

Before we begin however, let's define the nonnegative rank of a matrix.
Given a nonnegative matrix X of dimension p by n, the nonnegative rank is the minimum r s.t. there exists an exact nonnegative matrix factorisation with W having r columns and H having r rows.

Intuitively, the matrix X in blue, corresponds to n vectors of dimension p. What we want is to be able to generate all of these vectors from as few basis vectors as possible. The basis vectors form the columns of the matrix W in green.

---------------
2.

With this notion in mind, we can now make a connection with the bipartite dimension in graph theory.
Let's consider a bipartite graph induced by X with V1 and V2 as its first and second sets of vertices and E, the set of edges.

Then, let us recall the definitions of a biclique and a bipartite dimension.

A biclique is a bipartite graph s.t. every vertex in V1 is connected to every vertex in V2.

The bipartite dimension of a graph is the minimum number of bicliques needed to cover all edges in E.
----------------
3.
In this figure, we can see an example of a bipartite graph that is composed of 4 bicliques.

From this, it can be proved that the bipartite dimension of a graph induced by the matrix X is a lower bound for the nonnegative rank of X.
-----------------
4.

Next, we will talk about the extended formulation in linear optimization. 

We are already familiar with this optimization problem. Indeed, we can visualize the constrains as a polytope P. What can be interesting to find is the extended formulation of this polytope P. 

The extended formulation of P is a higher dimensional polytope Q and a linear projection pi s.t. the projection of Q is equal to P.

In our case, if P is defined with Ax \leq b, then Q can be defined as Cx +Dy \leq d.
----------------
5.
Then we can also define the matrix X as the slack of each inequality for each vertex.

With that in mind, it can be proved that the minimum size of an extended formulation Q of P is equal to the nonnegative rank of X.

The reason why it can be interesting to find extended formulations is that, when P has exponentially many faces, this allows to solve the linear optimization problem in polynomial time.


---------------
6. 

To sum up, we have seen that the NMF does not only generate meaningful features, but also has many applications in various domains. Indeed, we can use nonnegative matrices to describe very different things, from pixel values, to word counts, graphs, linear optimization problems, but we can also find them in probability theory, communication complexity and many more. Although there are theoretical difficulties we have to deal with in this linear dimensionality reduction technique, such as its NP-hardness and ill-posedness, there still exist different ways to deal with them.

Thank you for your attention, and if you happen to have any questions, we'd happily discuss them with you.
